This is January 25, sitting in the beautiful
living room out at Pebble Creek with Glenn
Johnson. Now, Glenn, check your mic. Okay, I'll
check my mic and see if it's working okay.
Glenn, for the sake of someone in years from now who
might be listening to this or reading the
transcript, would you summarize your experience
and background, where'd you grow up, go to school,
and particularly your experience academically
before you began to think about moving to College
Station, Texas. Sure. Well, I was born in
Cleveland, Ohio, 1930. My mother and father were
divorced when I was a baby, and so we moved to little
community called Sebring, Ohio, about 65 miles
southeast of Cleveland. And I spent my elementary
and secondary years there in Sebring, at Sebring
McKinley High School. I attended undergraduate
school at Kent State University, 1949 to 1953. I
had one year of teaching experience in a suburb of
Cleveland, Euclid on Lake Erie. I had two years of
military duty because I'd been in the ROTC, so I
went into the military and fulfilled that
obligation, the two-year obligation. When I came
out of the service, it was in the middle of the
summer, So I knew I would be going back to Euclid,
Ohio, and I used that summer to start my master's
program at Ohio State University where I finished
a master of arts with a thesis.
Later I became what was called a master teacher in
Euclid, Ohio, then an assistant principal, and by
that time I'd finished the master's and started my
doctorate at Columbia University going summers.
I was offered principal ships in Euclid and in a
suburb of St. Louis, Missouri called Clayton,
Missouri. And I opted for the principal ship in
Clayton, Missouri and spent three years there
going to Columbia University for six-week summer
terms. And finally, my major professor said, it's
time you must come into residence. So I did. I went
into residence in 1966
through that academic year, 66, 67. At the end of my
residence, near the end of my residence, I was
being interviewed for assistant
superintendencies in upstate New York and a
superintendency in a suburb of Chicago,
Illinois. And I got this phone call out of the clear
blue sky, knew nothing about it coming, from a Dr.
Paul Hanseling at Texas A&M University. And he
said that they had a new position for an assistant
professor and that I seemed to have the
credentials for that position. And I asked him how
he knew me, how he got these credentials. and he
said he had written to Columbia University and
said this is what we're looking for and they sent me
your credentials and we like what we see we'll pay
to have you come down here for a couple of days and
meet us and get acquainted with us and see if you
would be interested so I talked to Ida I hadn't the
foggiest idea where Texas A&M University was I'd
heard of it primarily because of football more
than anything else. I couldn't in my own mind while
I was talking to Dr. Hentschling sort out if this
was Texas Tech or Texas A&M or West Texas or East
Texas or whatever. There were so many to people who
had never been to Texas and I had never been to
Texas. So I told Ida as we talked, you know, I've
never been to Texas. This is an opportunity for me
to at least go visit Texas, and I'll continue
looking at these other jobs. So sure enough, I came
down and really had not the inkling, no inkling at
all, that I would end up staying here. But I liked
what I saw. I thought it was a nice community. I had
four very young children. This looked like a nice
place after living in places like St. Louis,
Missouri and New York City. They have four young
children grow up. And I guess the key factor was
when I finished my presentation to the faculty in
the Department of Education in the College of
Liberal Arts. And I finished interviewing with
the key people, Bill Graves and Paul Hanserling.
and they took me up to meet the dean of the college
who was Frank W.R. Hubert and Frank Hubert painted
for me what Texas A&M University is today and I had I
had no idea as I looked at what I saw in 1967
What we see today is, you know, it's just beyond
your comprehension, and yet Frank Hubert saw
this. And he was very strong in his support of
President Earl Rudder. I believe I interviewed
with, from there I think I interviewed with Byers,
Vice President Byers, I believe. And my final
stop, which really came as a total shock, because I
never dreamed I'd go beyond the college dean. But
there I was. I'd been with the vice president. Now
they were taking me over to meet the president of
this university, Earl Rudder. That just was
beyond my comprehension. And Earl Rudder was a
very gentle man. He was very courteous. He said he
had heard good things about me. Hope that I like
Texas A&M University. And so when that interview
was over, I signaled to Paul Hensling and Bill
Graves that I'd like a couple of days to go home and
think about this. And they agreed to that. When I
got home, I described the situation to my wife,
Ida. and ask her if she thought we should go back and
let her look at it she said no whatever i decided to
do was going to be fine with her so i called paul and
told him i would come and i've never regretted that
move as far as you know They were not contrasting
you with anyone else. They were looking at you, yes
or no. To my knowledge, that's true. This 1967
spring, fall, what? Spring. Spring of 67. Hoping
for you to be here that fall. That fall. That's
correct. What was the, and we're not going to talk
money any other time, what was the beginning
salary? Well, it was $12,400. For 12 months or not?
That was for 12 months. That was one of their
selling points, by the way. a lot of colleges and
universities hire you only for nine months and
then if they have the money they might negotiate
either half summer or a full summer but Dr.
Henseling made it clear and it was reinforced by
Frank W.R. Hubert that what they were trying to do
was to get people here 12 months so they were
offering 12-month contracts Try to summarize for
this preservation what description they gave you
of the aspirations they had for education. Again,
it was really Frank W.R. Hubert who painted this
picture for me. He said he thought in the not too
distant future that they would have a college of
education at Texas A&M University. At the present
time, at that time, they had just the Department of
Education within the College of Liberal Arts. But
he said that I believe their projected enrollment
for the fall was going to be somewhere around 600
ladies coming in to the programs at Texas A&M.
which proved to be true. And that he saw nothing but
tremendous growth because they had opened up
recently to ladies coming into Texas A&M
University. And with the demand for the growing
number of children and the demand for more
schools, public schools and so forth, he saw that
growth taking Texas A&M to eventually a college of
education. okay describe finding a place to live
getting family here while I was here visiting Bill
Graves did take me on a tour of the community and I
guess the most startling thing that I saw was there
just wasn't any restaurants to speak of I think we
ate maybe at Tom's barbecue and there was an A&W
root beer and they took me out to the Briarcrest
Country Club for a meal and that's where they said
that's pretty much it if you wanted a nice meal you
usually went to Briarcrest Country Club they said
the Texan had just opened up on What is that, South
Main? South Texas. South College. South College,
yeah. On South College. And that didn't look too
appetizing. That was an old, run-down, drive-in
hamburger place, I guess, before the new owners
bought it and changed it to this really fine
restaurant. We were surprised the first time we
ate there. They really turned out good food. But
several times, I know when we did move here several
times, we'd go out to Caldwell to eat. We'd go out to
the Surrey Inn out there to eat because there just
weren't many choices here. Right. As you were
looking for housing, what did you find? I didn't
find anything off the bat, but I lucked out again
because... One of the professors in the College of
Liberal Arts in the Department of English,
Cannon, Dr. Cannon, said that he was into the
rental business and he had a home that people had
rented were going to be moving. And he said, you
know, he'd be more than happy if I wanted to rent
that house. And that's what we did. We rented that
house sight unseen. We rented that home and lived
there the first two years we were here. Now, I said
we weren't going to talk money again. What was that
first rent? I have no idea. I don't recall what it
was. I'll bet it was a little bit less than the cost
in either St. Louis, Cleveland, or New York City.
Oh, yes. In fact, that was another factor that came
into play. You know, the beginning salary was not
comparable to what people were talking about for
assistant superintendent up in New York or
superintendent of the suburb of Chicago. There
was no comparison. But when you calculated in,
factored in the cost of living, you could do pretty
well. It wasn't still going to match a
superintendent's job, but still. Right.
Describe the faculty in education when you came.
Who were the key veterans and the important
newcomers and so forth? Well, the key person at
that time, of course, was Dr. Paul Hansling, who
was head of the department in My recollection was
that he had somewhere along the line established a
relationship with Frank W.R. Hubert out in the
public school sector because Dr. Hubert had also
been out at Orange, as I recall. and had risen to the
status of a superintendent there before going to
the Texas Education Agency. Now, I may have that
reversed. He may have... Both. Both? He was my
seventh grade band director. Then he goes away to
the Army, comes back, is the principal in Orange,
then goes to Austin with the Texas Education
Agency, also completes his doctoral degree goes
back to Orange as superintendent, and then comes
here in 59 as the dean of arts and sciences before
that was broken up. Now, one of the things that I'm
pretty sure it was Frank W.R. Hubert that told me
this. I feel fairly confident, but he's still
alive, so you could check with Frank on this. But I
believe at one time I may have asked him, you know,
how did he end up at Texas A&M University? And he
said he had this relationship with, I believe it
was Edgars, who was commissioner, or... Yes. Is
that right? Commissioner of Education? He had
preceded, he was the superintendent in Orange.
during World War II and then went to Austin as the
superintendent of the Austin system and then
moved up. And he knew Hubert well.
Would you like coffee or tea, hot cider? Hot cider a
little later, whenever he's going to have some.
That was J.W.? J.W. Edgar. And the way I heard the
story was that Earl Rudder when he decided that he
wanted education to move at Texas A&M University
and that he too had foreseen somewhere down the
line a college of education. He had an opening for
the Dean of Liberal Arts or may have been called
Arts and Sciences. Arts and Sciences, yes. And he
wanted to know who was the best educator in Texas
that he could go after. and maybe convinced to come
to Texas A&M. And the person he talked to was J.W.
Edgars, Commissioner of Education. And the story
I heard was that J.W. Edgars didn't hesitate. He
said, that's Frank W.R. Hubert. And so he went
after Hubert, and the rest is history. Okay, but
who were the other key people? Okay, after Paul,
within the department, To me it would have been
Bill Graves, who was head of elementary education
at that time. And Bill wanted to move more into
concentrating on the graduate programs in
elementary education. I forget who was in charge
of secondary education at the time. But he would
have been Bill Graves' counterpart at the
secondary level. And he too wanted to get out of
handling everything from undergraduate to
graduate and concentrate more on the graduate
programs. So both of those gentlemen were going to
concentrate on bringing in new people who could
take over the undergraduate program so it would
free them up to concentrate on graduate programs.
And that's pretty much what happened. Now, there
were some reading people. Don Barker was there. He
had an educational psychology background.
don't recall, I'd have to get an old catalog out and
kind of review who the key people were what was your
describe your first assignments what were your
courses and what did you see as your
responsibilities well i had five courses that i
had to teach and total responsibility for
everything involving the elementary education
program and my counterpart who came in at the same
time had a secondary education background And he
assumed total responsibility for the
undergraduate secondary program. And both of us
had... Who was that? Again, you know, I really need
a catalog to pull that out. Jerry Salick. Jerry
Salick. Jerry left after a couple of years and went
on to other things, but... Jerry and I kind of hit it
off because we were both coming in new, and we had
come out of programs where they were kind of on
cutting-edge things. For example, when I came
down for my interview and talked to the faculty,
made my presentation, it was on the use of
development of non-graded technology. schools
and the use of what was called Flanders
interaction analysis, a technique to measure the
verbal interaction between teachers and
students in classrooms. And the faculty really
was pretty oblivious to this. They really weren't
up on this. They'd heard about it. They may have
read some articles in magazines, but they didn't
understand the details of it well jerry came out of
that same kind of background and we immediately
uh... started to talk about working together even
though i was elementary with elementary
prospective teachers and he was secondary with
secondary prospective teachers we said you know
maybe we can pool our resources and
combine a lot of our programs and really benefit
from each other. and the faculty that would be
surrounding us. And that's true. That's true.
That's what happened. With the blessing of Paul
Hensling and Bill Graves and the person in charge
of secondary, they thought that was a good
concept. And they liked what was called a block
program. They didn't know about block programs.
And they wanted us to implement a block program.
And we listened to them and said, yeah, we can do
that. So there were so few students at the
undergraduate level
high enough status you know where they would be
seniors i think i doubt if we had more than 30
elementary and secondary students all together
that would reach that level and we could pull them
into a block program and offer them all 15 hours
together and so we just combined them we put the
elementary and secondary and jerry had some
things that the elementary benefited from and he
was delighted to have me train him in Flanders
interaction analysis. They knew nothing about
that. I think we only broke out for a course in
elementary education, and he only broke out for a
course in secondary education. Otherwise, the
history and philosophy of education, the
teaching patterns and so forth, we combined and
ran those as one class block program. You
mentioned a while ago responsibility for five
courses to begin with. How many per semester were
you teaching? I taught all five. You taught five?
Five three-hour courses? Five three-hour
courses. And at first, were there any graduate
degrees available in education? Yes. There was a
master's? There was a master's degree.
Industrial Education, I believe it was, had their
EDD, Doctor of Education. I think that was... But
the enrollment was primarily undergraduate at
the time you arrived. Well, actually, they had a
pretty good graduate enrollment. It exceeded
the... undergraduate enrollment as I recall
I could be off on that but if not it was awfully close
and I think it was because historically people
went elsewhere for undergraduate degrees in
education and then came to Texas A&M for their
graduate degrees in either the Department of
Education or Ag Education or Industrial
Education. And Ag Education and the College of Ag
and Industrial Ed and Engineering would come over
to the Department of Education to get student
teaching and a couple other courses, as I recall.
As you began your work here, Where was education
located physically? We were in the academic
building and primarily on the top floor of the
fourth floor of the old academic building. Any
stories about your first office or getting moved
in? Yes. Probably the funniest thing that
happened to me was
hiring people to work within the program. And
while we were still housed in the academic
building, one of the people that I hired was an
experienced kindergarten teacher. Her name was
Mary Bassett. And she had been teaching
kindergarten out at the Presbyterian Church. And
Mary came on board with us. And I can recall
probably
the very first year that the College of Education
had been formed, we had a and i'd become a
department head we had a meeting in in the room that
we used on the fourth floor of the academic
building and all of those rooms had all the windows
had been nailed closed there there wasn't a window
you could open and as i recall the story was because
They had air conditioning now and they didn't want
people opening those windows so they simply
nailed the darn things. And it was really hot this
one day that I was having a faculty meeting and as we
were uh... going along in the faculty meeting and
everyone was hot and we could hardly wait to get out
of there we continued to talk and proceed with the
faculty meeting and mary bassett just very
quietly got up walked over to the windows and took
her shoe off and broke the window
she'd had enough of that hot room that I guess the
air conditioner had gone out. Now, you ask how my
office was. We shared offices then. There were
always about two of us to an office. So I was sharing
one of the small offices up there. Right, now you
were certainly well qualified by experience in
the real world of education and Hubert was.
Hengeling, by and large was the departmental
faculty all blessed with real education
experience? I'd say so. Yeah, I'd say they had all
been real practitioners out in the field. As you
chatted with these people before you came down
here, did they talk about doctoral work in the
future? Were they hoping for doctoral programs in
education? No, I think it was too early. I don't
think the foresight that Frank Hubert had, and I
assume in retrospect that was probably ongoing in
the interaction with President Rutter, So they
would have had information that the faculty would
not have had as they were trying to grease the
tracks to get a college of education established,
which came very quickly. I mean, the end of my first
year, I hadn't established myself statewide. I'd
been over in met J.W. Edgars. I was back to make a
presentation to the teacher
education group there and won approval for the
first kindergarten endorsement in the state of
Texas, which threw everyone for a loop because
They did not associate Texas A&M with being
innovative and bringing in new educational
programs. Nobody had a kindergarten endorsement
in the state. But I made a presentation that Frank
Hubert said went extremely well because he was
there and Edgars liked it. And we just seemed to get
almost immediate approval on implementing this
new program.
Those kinds of interactions, and Frank Hubert was
kind of leading me along. He took me to various
meetings throughout the state. So in the spring of
my very first year here, University of Texas came
calling. And I asked Dean Hubert if it would be all
right if I went over. They wanted to interview me
for a position. And his words to me were, yes, but
don't you commit yourself until you come back here
and talk to me. And I said, fine. They wined and
dined, my wife and I, for two days over there at
Forty Acres. And before I left over there, they
offered me a position as assistant professor. My
load would not be five courses, it would be one
course. I would not have all these student
teachers to be responsible for. I would have six
graduate interns that I would work with. They said
that would probably be my load each fall and each
spring. So, wow. I came back and talked to Ida, and I
said, I'm going over there. Boy, that is really
some deal. And they offered me a salary increase,
but I kept my word to Frank Hubert and went in and
talked to him and told him I really couldn't turn
that down. That was so remarkable. And that's when
he said, well, listen, now this is not well known,
but we're going to have a college of education, and
I really want you to stay and be on the ground floor
to form a foundation. I see you as one of my
department heads in this new college of
education, and we'll match their salary. And he
said, You can count on me to let you decide what your
load's going to be because if my prediction is
right, you'll have the authority to do that. Wow.
And you'd been out of graduate school one year. One
year. Pretty interesting year. It was. It was
unbelievable. Now that growth pattern at Texas
A&M was just unparalleled, I think, in the history
of maybe education period. Because in
retrospect, I think Rutter probably got that
college of education established faster than
anyone had ever gotten a college of education
established. We had, as I recall, 600 ladies that
first year I came here. It doubled the second year.
I think it was 1,200. And it doubled again the third
year. It was like 2,400. So there, Rutter and
Hubert's crystal ball gazing was coming true.
They saw that kind of a massive growth taking place
at A&M. Describe... You said you were with Hubert a
few times when he made presentations to various
groups. Describe his technique.